In this lecture, you'll learn about how etherchannel load balancing works, and I'm going to use the
diagram that you see on the slide here throughout this lecture.
So I've got two switches which have got four links between them that have been grouped into an etherchannel,
and each of those four links is 1Gbps Ethernet interfaces. Just starting with gi0/1
on the left going to gi0/4 on the right. In the bottom switch,
I've got some PCs plugged in there.
I've got PC-1 and PC-2.
And then the top switch,
I've got some servers. There's Server-1 and Server-2.
So in this lecture, we're going to cover how etherchannel load balances the different flows that are going across
the links between the switches.
A flow is a communication from a client to a server using a particular application. If PC-1, in our example
example, opens a web session to Server-1 and PC-2 opens an FTP session to Server-2, we'd have
two flows going through our switches.
And with etherchannel, a single flow is load balanced onto a single port channel interface.
For example, all packets in the flow from PC-1 to Server-1, always go over interface gi0/1.
All packets and flow from PC-2 to Server-2 always go over interface gi0/2.
So, looking at that with an animation, the first packet and flow from PC-1 to Server-1,
it hits the first switch.
The switch decides which interface it's going to load balance it over.
It chooses gi0/1 in our example and that goes to the server.
The next packet in the flow will also go over to the same interface.
So it comes in the switch, it load balances it to the same interface again and then it goes up to the server.
On the second flow, from PC-2 to Server-2 that comes into the switch, the switch will use this algorithm
to decide which interface to load balance it onto - gi0/2 in our example,
and it goes to the server. When the second and third and fourth and so on packets come in from that flow,
they will all be load balanced onto the same interface.
Packets from the same flow are always load balanced on the same interface. They're not load balanced
round-robin across all the interfaces in the port channel. For example, we don't load balance
the first packet from PC-1 to Server-1 on interface gi0/1 and then the second packet
on that same flow to gi0/2.
The reason for that is that round-robin load balancing could cause packets to arrive out of order at
the destination and that would break some applications.
So it makes sure that doesn't happen.
We always load balance packets from the same flow on to the same interface, so they're always going to arrive
in order.
So this does not happen, you see the first packet on the flow went over to interface gi0/1,
the second packet in the same flow over gi0/2, we don't do that.
So because the way this works, because a single flow always gets load balanced onto the same interface,
any single flow receives a bandwidth of a single link in the port channel as its maximum.
That's a maximum of 1Gbps bandwidth per flow in our example where we were using 1Gbps links
between our switches.
But there's an aggregate bandwidth of 4Gbps across all available flows.
So you can think of a port channel as a multi-lane motorway.
The cars always stay in their own lane and a single lane, but because there are multiple lanes, the
overall traffic gets there quicker.
Obviously an odd example, if we only had one uplink rather than four, we don't have so much overall
bandwidth available between the switches. Etherchannel
provides redundancy as well as load balancing. If a link fails, the flows will be load
balanced to the remaining links.
OK, so that's how load balancing and redundancy works.
See you in the next lecture for more etherchannel.